# Project: Data Modeling with Postgres, Spark and AWS

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes it using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID and are stored in the 
S3 bucket with address `s3a://udacity-dend/song_data`.  
Below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by [this event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.  
The logs are stored in the S3 bucket with address `s3a://udacity-dend/log_data`.  
Below is an example of what the data in a log file, looks like.
```
{"artist":"The Kooks","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Sara","gender":"F","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Johnson","length":132.25751,"level":"paid","location":"Winston-Salem, NC","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540809153796.0,"sessionId":152,"song":"Eddie's Gun","status":200,"ts":1541260356796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (iPhone; CPU iPhone OS 7_1_2 like Mac OS X) AppleWebKit\/537.51.2 (KHTML, like Gecko) Version\/7.0 Mobile\/11D257 Safari\/9537.53\"","userId":"95"}
```

## Project structure

Files used on the project:

1. `dl.cfg` needs to be filled with your aws keys, DON'T SHARE THEM INCAUTIOUSLY!
1. `etl.py` extracts songs and log data from S3, transforms it using Spark, and loads the dimensional tables created in parquet format back to S3.
1. `sql_queries.py` contains the queries that will be used in the etl script.
1. `README.md` is an overview of the whole project.

## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets, I created a star schema database optimized for queries on song play analysis, which is composed of the following tables.

#### Fact Table

***songplays*** - records in log data associated with song plays:
- songplay_id int PRIMARY KEY;
- start_time date NOT NULL;
- user_id int NOT NULL;
- level ENUM ('paid', 'free');
- song_id text NOT NULL;
- artist_id text NOT NULL;
- session_id int;
- location text;
- user_agent text.

#### Dimension Tables

***users*** - users in the app:
- user_id int PRIMARY KEY;
- first_name text;
- last_name text;
- gender ENUM ('M', 'F');
- level ENUM ('paid', 'free').

***songs*** - songs in music database:
- song_id text PRIMARY KEY;
- title text;
- artist_id text NOT NULL;
- year int;
- duration float NOT NULL.

***artists*** - artists in music database:
- artist_id text PRIMARY KEY;
- name text;
- location text;
- latitude float;
- longitude float.

***time*** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units:
- start_time date PRIMARY KEY;
- hour int;
- day int;
- week int;
- month int;
- year int;
- weekday text.

## ETL Pipeline

Load credentials in the dl.cfg file and execute etl.py from the terminal to trigger the pipeline execution.

1. Read data from S3
```
Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
```
The script reads song_data and load_data from S3.

2. Process data using spark

Transforms them to create five different tables listed under Dimension Tables and Fact Table. Each table includes the right columns and data types. Duplicates are addressed where appropriate.

3. Load it back to S3

Writes them to partitioned parquet files in table directories on S3.  
Each of the five tables are written to parquet files in a separate analytics directory on S3. Each table has its own folder within the directory. Songs table files are partitioned by year and then artist. Time table files are partitioned by year and month. Songplays table files are partitioned by year and month.